---
layout: post
title:  "Model-Free Methods and Neural Networks"
date:   2016-04-20
description: "An explanation of reductionist and model-free methods with regards to neural networks."
---
## Reductionism ##
In many sciences researchers follow the believe that every process can be broken down into its components. It follows from the idea that science can be used to describe everything. This process is called reductionism and is applied in many sciences. It explains an entire system through the interactions of its individual parts or as Aristotle said: "The whole equals the sum of its parts". This process can also be interpreted as simplifying the rich reality into a model. It is aptly named since most of the simplifications imply some reduction like reducing the number of free variables by transferring a process from its open environment into a closed and controlled lab environment. 

## Holism ##
Humanity has obviously been able to apply reductionism in many different areas with great success. However, critics of reductionist methods argue that the whole can sometimes be more than the sum of its parts. This antithesis is coined holism. There are different domains of problems where the reductionist approach struggles. Such problems belong to the bizarre domain. The global economy, human physiology, the inner workings of our brain, and many other complex problems are bizarre. It means that they are irreducible, chaotic, changing over time, and cannot be reliably predicted. Monika Anderson introduced this term in her research on Artificial Intelligence \cite{MonicaAnderson}. She also pushed forward the term model-free methods to describe holistic methods. 

## Modeling at the Meta-Level ##
Model-free methods don't model anything in the problem domain. Instead, they model at the meta-level. This is an important distinction to make. The simplest model-free method e.g. is trial and error. More sophisticated methods would include memory capabilities like a look-up table. Such systems then need to go through experience or be applied on data so that they can learn models in an unsupervised way. Unsupervised and Reinforcement Learning are essential aspects of model-free methods. The field of artificial intelligence has a long tradition of using a reductionist approach when it comes to intelligence and learning but is currently shifting more and more towards trained methods which are either hybrid or mode-free approaches. 

## Neural Networks as a Model-Free Method ##
The artificial neural network trained with Unsupervised Learning is, in my opinion, a good example of a powerful model-free method. Other learning regimes for artificial neural networks like Supervised Learning, on the other hand, are not purely model-free since they receive feedback from a supervising teacher (i.e. prior classification of data) to train its model. The prior classification of such data leads to a model where the developer of the algorithm defines which category every data point in the training set belongs to.  If this model is wrong in some way, then the network will have a much harder time optimising its weights. 

## Conclusion ##
One of the strengths when using reductionist approaches is the effectiveness of the construction of such models and the effectiveness of the logic used for building them. A developer can describe many problems using a simplified or abstract design. They can be used to make long-term predictions, such as predicting planetary orbits years into the future. However, if a problem belongs to the bizarre domain, then it might be tough to become proficient since it might be irreducible or changing over time. A model-free or hybrid approach can be more powerful when dealing with problems of this kind because it can use intuition. Intuition is what we use ourselves in our everyday actions like walking, using language, or any other action which we do "without thinking". Intuition is essentially model-free. It is not based on a high-level model like logic and requires experience and is acquired by learning. 

Nevertheless, model-free methods come with some severe limitations. Some of which are mirroring the strengths of logic based systems. Model-free methods cannot generate new knowledge through mechanical manipulations of the existing theory since there is no such thing as a theory in the first place. There are also reasonable concerns about model-free methods getting stuck with suboptimal solutions because of a suboptimal search and exploration of its generated models but overall I've the opinion that we need to build models of the world that are probably too complex for a reductionist approach. It is, therefore, necessary that we put model-free methods to work and that we find powerful algorithms to improve the effectiveness of model-free methods.


